docs/getting-started.md, before:

---
slug: /
id: getting-started
title: Getting Started with ScalaPy
sidebar_label: Getting Started
---

ScalaPy makes it easy to use Python libraries from Scala code. With a simple API, automatic conversion between Scala and Python types, and optional static typing, ScalaPy scales from hobby projects to production systems.

## Installation
First, add ScalaPy to your SBT build:
```scala
// JVM
libraryDependencies += "me.shadaj" %% "scalapy-core" % "0.5.0"

// Scala Native
libraryDependencies += "me.shadaj" %%% "scalapy-core" % "0.5.0"
```

You'll then need to add the Python native libraries to your project and configure SBT to run your code in a separate JVM instance.

```scala
fork := true

import scala.sys.process._
lazy val pythonLdFlags = {
  val withoutEmbed = "python3-config --ldflags".!!
  if (withoutEmbed.contains("-lpython")) {
    withoutEmbed.split(' ').map(_.trim).filter(_.nonEmpty).toSeq
  } else {
    val withEmbed = "python3-config --ldflags --embed".!!
    withEmbed.split(' ').map(_.trim).filter(_.nonEmpty).toSeq
  }
}

lazy val pythonLibsDir = {
  pythonLdFlags.find(_.startsWith("-L")).get.drop("-L".length)
}

javaOptions += s"-Djna.library.path=$pythonLibsDir"
```

If you'd like to use [Scala Native](https://scala-native.readthedocs.io/), follow the instructions there to create a project with Scala Native `0.4.0-M2`. Then, add the following additional configuration to your SBT build to link the Python interpreter.

```scala
lazy val pythonLdFlags = ... // same as above

nativeLinkingOptions ++= pythonLdFlags
```

## Hello World!
Now that ScalaPy is installed, let's start with a simple example. ScalaPy offers a dynamically typed API that's great for making quick Python calls with little ceremony. First, we can use the Python `len` function to calculate the length of a list. Using `py.Dynamic.global`, you can access any members of the global scope.

```scala mdoc
import me.shadaj.scalapy.py
import me.shadaj.scalapy.py.SeqConverters

val listLengthPython = py.Dynamic.global.len(List(1, 2, 3).toPythonProxy)
```

Here, we took a Scala `List`, converted it to a Python list, sent it to the `len` function, and got back a Python number.

To convert Python values back into Scala, we use the `.as` method and pass in the type we want.

```scala mdoc
val listLength = listLengthPython.as[Int]
```
## Execution
ScalaPy officially supports Python 3.{7, 8, 9}. If you want to use another version of Python, you should either define the environment variable `SCALAPY_PYTHON_LIBRARY`

```shell
python --version
# Python 3.8.6
export SCALAPY_PYTHON_LIBRARY=python3.8
sbt run
```

or set the system property `scalapy.python.library`

```shell
sbt -Dscalapy.python.library=python3.8 run
```

The system property takes precedence over the environment variable.

Commit message:

Set python executable prior to initialization (#200)
* Set python executable prior to initialization

https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/init.html#c.Py_SetProgramName

* Add support for Py_SetProgramName for scala native

* Add doc

* Add changelog entry

* Update gitignore

* Enable the scalapy.python.programname system property for scala native

* Free pointer and minor refactor

* Env vars now take precedence over system properties

docs/getting-started.md, after:

---
slug: /
id: getting-started
title: Getting Started with ScalaPy
sidebar_label: Getting Started
---

ScalaPy makes it easy to use Python libraries from Scala code. With a simple API, automatic conversion between Scala and Python types, and optional static typing, ScalaPy scales from hobby projects to production systems.

## Installation
First, add ScalaPy to your SBT build:
```scala
// JVM
libraryDependencies += "me.shadaj" %% "scalapy-core" % "0.5.0"

// Scala Native
libraryDependencies += "me.shadaj" %%% "scalapy-core" % "0.5.0"
```

You'll then need to add the Python native libraries to your project and configure SBT to run your code in a separate JVM instance.

```scala
fork := true

import scala.sys.process._
lazy val pythonLdFlags = {
  val withoutEmbed = "python3-config --ldflags".!!
  if (withoutEmbed.contains("-lpython")) {
    withoutEmbed.split(' ').map(_.trim).filter(_.nonEmpty).toSeq
  } else {
    val withEmbed = "python3-config --ldflags --embed".!!
    withEmbed.split(' ').map(_.trim).filter(_.nonEmpty).toSeq
  }
}

lazy val pythonLibsDir = {
  pythonLdFlags.find(_.startsWith("-L")).get.drop("-L".length)
}

javaOptions += s"-Djna.library.path=$pythonLibsDir"
```

If you'd like to use [Scala Native](https://scala-native.readthedocs.io/), follow the instructions there to create a project with Scala Native `0.4.0-M2`. Then, add the following additional configuration to your SBT build to link the Python interpreter.

```scala
lazy val pythonLdFlags = ... // same as above

nativeLinkingOptions ++= pythonLdFlags
```

## Hello World!
Now that ScalaPy is installed, let's start with a simple example. ScalaPy offers a dynamically typed API that's great for making quick Python calls with little ceremony. First, we can use the Python `len` function to calculate the length of a list. Using `py.Dynamic.global`, you can access any members of the global scope.

```scala mdoc
import me.shadaj.scalapy.py
import me.shadaj.scalapy.py.SeqConverters

val listLengthPython = py.Dynamic.global.len(List(1, 2, 3).toPythonProxy)
```

Here, we took a Scala `List`, converted it to a Python list, sent it to the `len` function, and got back a Python number.

To convert Python values back into Scala, we use the `.as` method and pass in the type we want.

```scala mdoc
val listLength = listLengthPython.as[Int]
```
## Execution
ScalaPy officially supports Python 3.{7, 8, 9}. If you want to use another version of Python, you should either define the environment variable `SCALAPY_PYTHON_LIBRARY`

```shell
python --version
# Python 3.8.6
export SCALAPY_PYTHON_LIBRARY=python3.8
sbt run
```

or set the system property `scalapy.python.library`

```shell
sbt -Dscalapy.python.library=python3.8 run
```

The environment variable takes precedence over the system property.

## Virtualenv

To use ScalaPy with a Python installation inside a virtualenv, set the path to the Python interpreter executable using either the `scalapy.python.programname` system property

```shell
sbt -Dscalapy.python.programname=/Users/example/example-env/bin/python run
```

or the `SCALAPY_PYTHON_PROGRAMNAME` environment variable

```shell
export SCALAPY_PYTHON_PROGRAMNAME=/Users/example/example-env/bin/python
sbt run
```

The environment variable takes precedence over the system property.

This variable is used as the input to the Python/C API function `Py_SetProgramName`. `Py_SetProgramName` is run prior to `Py_Initialize` to set the correct paths to Python run-time libraries (`prefix`, `exec_prefix`, ...).
