docs/static-types.md, before:

---
id: static-types
title: Static Types in ScalaPy
sidebar_label: Static Types
---

One of the most important parts of Scala is its strong type system. ScalaPy lets you continue using this even as you use dynamically-typed Python libraries by defining static type definitions.

## Defining Type Facades
Creating type definitions in ScalaPy is very similar to creating them with Scala.js. Type definitions are just annotated traits with methods defining what is available on the underlying Python value.

For example, we could define a static type definition for the built-in string type.

```scala mdoc
import me.shadaj.scalapy.py

@py.native trait PyString extends py.Object {
  def count(subsequence: String): Int = py.native
}
```

Once you have this type facade, it is usable with the `.as` method just like converting to existing Scala types. So, to get a type-safe reference to the Python string we have loaded, we convert it to our facade type.

```scala mdoc
val string = py.module("string").digits.as[PyString]
string.count("123")
```

If we try to call this method with the wrong parameter type, we get the expected error message

```scala mdoc:fail
string.count(123)
```

## Static Module Types
When dealing with modules, ScalaPy offers an additional type `StaticModule` that makes it possible to map a top-level Scala object to a Python module. For example, to create a static facade to the `string` module we saw earlier, we can define a `StaticModule` facade.

```scala mdoc
@py.native object StringsModule extends py.StaticModule("string") {
  def digits: String = py.native
}

StringsModule.digits
```

## Special Types
Due to Python's dynamically typed nature, some APIs can have types that don't easily map to Scala constructs. To help with this, ScalaPy includes some special types to help defining static types for these situations easier.

### `py.|`
ScalaPy includes the union type `py.|` which can represent situations where one of two types is required. For example, the Python `Random` class can be initialized with a seed that is an integer or a string. We could define a type facade as

```scala mdoc
@py.native trait PythonRandomModule extends py.Object {
  def Random(a: py.|[Int, String]): py.Dynamic = py.native
}
```

And use it with either input type
```scala mdoc
val random = py.module("random").as[PythonRandomModule]
random.Random(123)
random.Random("123")
```

Commit message:

Introduce the `@PyBracketAccess` annotation for using bracket syntax in facades (#194)

docs/static-types.md, after:

---
id: static-types
title: Static Types in ScalaPy
sidebar_label: Static Types
---

One of the most important parts of Scala is its strong type system. ScalaPy lets you continue using this even as you use dynamically-typed Python libraries by defining static type definitions.

## Defining Type Facades
Creating type definitions in ScalaPy is very similar to creating them with Scala.js. Type definitions are just annotated traits with methods defining what is available on the underlying Python value.

For example, we could define a static type definition for the built-in string type.

```scala mdoc
import me.shadaj.scalapy.py

@py.native trait PyString extends py.Object {
  def count(subsequence: String): Int = py.native
}
```

Once you have this type facade, it is usable with the `.as` method just like converting to existing Scala types. So, to get a type-safe reference to the Python string we have loaded, we convert it to our facade type.

```scala mdoc
val string = py.module("string").digits.as[PyString]
string.count("123")
```

If we try to call this method with the wrong parameter type, we get the expected error message

```scala mdoc:fail
string.count(123)
```
### Scala methods representing bracket access
The annotation `@PyBracketAccess` can be used on methods to mark them as representing indexing into the Python object using brackets in Python syntax. The target method must have one (to read the value) or two parameters (to update the value). For example, we can create a static facade for a list of integers:
```scala mdoc
import py.PyBracketAccess

@py.native trait IntList extends py.Any {
  @PyBracketAccess
  def apply(index: Int): Int = py.native

  @PyBracketAccess
  def update(index: Int, newValue: Int): Unit = py.native
}
```
Then let's create a Python list:
```scala mdoc
import py.PyQuote

val myList = py"[1, 2, 3]".as[IntList]
```
And now we can just use brackets to access elements by indexes. For example, we want to get element at index 0: 
```scala mdoc
myList(0) // in Python it will call `myList[0]` and return 1
```
We can also update elements of the list in the following way:
```scala mdoc
myList(0) = 4 // the updated list will be: [4, 2, 3]
```
The duo apply/update is often a sensible choice, because it gives array-like access on Scala’s side as well, but it is not required to use these names.

## Static Module Types
When dealing with modules, ScalaPy offers an additional type `StaticModule` that makes it possible to map a top-level Scala object to a Python module. For example, to create a static facade to the `string` module we saw earlier, we can define a `StaticModule` facade.

```scala mdoc
@py.native object StringsModule extends py.StaticModule("string") {
  def digits: String = py.native
}

StringsModule.digits
```

## Special Types
Due to Python's dynamically typed nature, some APIs can have types that don't easily map to Scala constructs. To help with this, ScalaPy includes some special types to help defining static types for these situations easier.

### `py.|`
ScalaPy includes the union type `py.|` which can represent situations where one of two types is required. For example, the Python `Random` class can be initialized with a seed that is an integer or a string. We could define a type facade as

```scala mdoc
@py.native trait PythonRandomModule extends py.Object {
  def Random(a: py.|[Int, String]): py.Dynamic = py.native
}
```

And use it with either input type
```scala mdoc
val random = py.module("random").as[PythonRandomModule]
random.Random(123)
random.Random("123")
```
